So, having seen how to search for an element
in an array, now let us turn to sorting.
So, the most basic motivation for sorting
comes from searching. As we have seen, if
you have an unsorted array, you have to search
for it by scanning the entire array from beginning
to end. So, you spend linear time searching
for the element, whereas if you had sorted
array, you can probe it at the midpoint and
use binary search and achieve the same result
in logarithmic time, and logarithmic time
is considerably faster than linear time.
Now, there are other advantages to having
the elements sorted. For instance, if you
want to find the median, the value for which
half the elements are bigger, half the elements
are smaller. Well, the median in a sorted
array is clearly the midpoint of the array.
If you want to do some other kind of statistical
things, such as building a frequency table
of values, when you sort these values they
all come together, right. So, all the equal
values will be in a contiguous block. So,
it is much easier to find how many copies
of each value are there.
And in particular, if you want only one copy
of every value, if you want to remove all
duplicates of the array, then you scan the
sorted array from beginning to end and for
each block of values keep just one copy. So,
there are very many different reasons why
one may want to sort an array to make further
computation on the array much easier.
So, let us imagine how you would like to sort
an array. So, forget about arrays and think
about just sorting something, which is given
to you as a physical collection of object.
So, say, you are teaching assistant for a
course and the instructor, the teacher who
is teaching the course has corrected the exams,
now wants you to sort the exam papers in order
of marks. So, say, your task is to arrange
them in descending order, how would you go
about this task?
So, one naive strategy is the following. You
would go through the entire stack and keep
track of the smallest mark that you have seen.
At the end of your pass you have the paper
in your hand, which has smallest mark among
the marks allotted to all the students. So,
you move this to a new pile, then you repeat
the process. You go through the remaining
papers after having discarded the smallest
one into the new pile and look for the next
smallest one, move that on top of the new
pile and so on. So, after the second pass
you have second smallest mark on the pile.
After the third pass you have the third smallest
mark on the pile and as you can imagine, after
n passes you have moved all n papers from
the old pile to the new pile in descending
order.
So, this particular strategy can be illustrated
as follows. So, supposing we have this list
or array of six elements. So, in the first
pass we look for the smallest value. So, the
smallest value in this case is 21. So, we
move 21 to a new list and remove it from the
original list. Now, we repeat the scan among
the remaining values. The value 32 is the
smallest one, so we remove that and move it
to new list. We keep doing this. So, at the
next step, we move 55 and then we move 64
and then we move 74 and then we move 89, right.
So, in this process if this had been a vertical
stack, 21 would be at the bottom, 89 would
be at the top, and so we would have the list
sorted from top to bottom in descending order.
In this case, it is from right to left in
descending order or from left to right in
ascending order.
So, this strategy is called selection sort.
So, we select in each round the next element,
which is the smallest, and therefore the next
to be put out in the sorted order and move
it to its correct position, that is to the
end of the final sorted list.
Now, this version of selection sort that we
just described, builds a second list. In other
words, in order to sort one pile we have to
create a second pile of papers. Now, we can
easily eliminate the second pile of papers
if we do the following. When we find the minimum
element, we know it must go to the beginning
of the list. So, instead of creating a new
list we move it to the beginning of the current
list. Of course, in the beginning of the current
list there is another value. So, we have to
do something with that value. You just exchange
the positions.
So, we find the minimum position and swap
the value at that minimum position with the
value at the first position. Now, the smallest
value in the entire array has moved to the
beginning. So, now, we start from the second
element onwards and look for the minimum.
Again, this will be the second smallest. So,
we, now having found that we will move that
to the second position in the array. So, we
keep doing this and without using a second
list we are able to do the same sorting that
we did before.
So, to see how this works we take the same
array that we had before. As we said, in the
first round we identified 21 as the minimum
element, which is marked in red and the 1st
position is 74. So, we would like 21 to be
at the beginning of this list. So, since 74
is there, we exchange 21 and 74 and we get
this new list. In this new list, now 21 is
marked in green to indicate that it is in
its final position. It is the smallest value,
it has moved to where it should be in the
sorted list. So, now we scan the remaining
elements and we identify that 32 is the smallest
element. Now, 32 already happens to be in
the 2nd position. So, we could think of exchanging
it with itself or doing nothing depending
on how you want to interpret it. So, 32 now
becomes marked in green, so that it stays
in the correct position.
Now, in the remaining list 55 is the smallest
element mark in red, but it has to be at position
3, which is occupied by 89 marked in yellow.
So, we exchange these two and now we have
55 in 3rd position. So, we keep doing this.
So, at the next step, we will identify 64
and swap it into the 4th position and then
we find, that 74 is already in the correct
position. So, we leave it where it is and
finally, of course, 89 is the only element.
So, when you have a list of one element there
is no sorting do be done.
So, this procedure can be described by a very
simple iterative algorithm. So, what we do
is, that we have, if you remember, we start
by scanning the entire array, that is, from
0 to n minus 1, we look for the minimum element
in that segment, right. So, we have an iteration,
which basically starts at the starting position
and then from the starting position onwards
it assumes, that the beginning is the, is,
is the minimum value and whenever you find
a smaller value, you mark that as the minimum
position. Now, having done all this right
we have now found the minimum from A 0 to
A n minus 1, then you move this value to the
beginning. So, you swap the starting position
and the minimum position. Now, we have the
smallest value at A 0.
So, now, you go back to this loop and now
you move starting position from 0 to 1. So,
you do the same scan for A 1 to A n minus
1, right and now starting position is 1. So,
at the end you swap the second smallest element
to A 1, then you do it for A 2 to A n minus
1 and so on, right. So, this is the simple
iterative version of selection sort where
we just start with the entire array, move
the smallest element to the first element,
first position, then we take the rest of the
array from A 1 onwards move the smallest element
to A 1, then start with A 2, find the smallest
element, move it to A 2 and so on.
So, how much time does this algorithm take?
So, clearly in order to find the minimum element
in an unsorted segment of length k we have
to scan the entire segment and this takes
K steps and in each iteration the segment
to be scanned reduces by 1. So, we start by
scanning all n elements, then we scan n minus
1 elements, then we scan n minus 2 elements
and so on. So, we have over all the number
of steps is n plus n minus 1 plus n minus
2 down to 1, which is just the usual summation
i is equal to 1 to n of i. And this we know
is n into n plus 1 by 2 which is order n square,
right. So, this naive algorithm selection
sort in this iterative implementation is n
square.
Now, there is another way of looking at selection
sort. So, remember we said, that we start
by finding the minimum element moving it to
the front and then doing the same thing. Whenever
you say do the same thing it is useful to
think of this as a recursive algorithm just
to convince yourself, that what you are doing
is correct. So, in order to sort in general
A from some position i to n minus 1, what
we do is we find the minimum value in the
segment, that is, from A i to A n minus 1
and move it to the beginning, which is A i,
right.
So, we have an array A and then we are at
a position i and the last position n minus
1. We are trying to sort this. So, what we
are saying is, we will find the minimum somewhere
and then exchange the value here and now what
is now achieved by this is, that this position
is now correct, right. So, the value at A
i is now in the correct position and therefore,
we now, only need to sort from i plus 1 to
n minus 1 and how do we do this? Recursively.
We just apply selection sort. So, we apply
selection sort to A from i plus 1 to n minus
1 and then this procedure stops when we have
only one element.
So, if you are going to start from A i is
equal to n minus 1 to n minus 1, then we do
nothing, right. So, this, the reason to think
of it recursively. One reason is, that the
code becomes a little easier to read. So,
you say, that you want to sort A from start
to n where start is the index of the unsorted
segment where it begins and n is the total
size. So, the last position is exactly n minus
1. So, if start is n minus 1 or bigger, then
you do nothing, you just return, otherwise
you find the smallest value in this segment
from start to n minus 1, right. So, this is
the same loop we did earlier.
We start with the minimum position being the
beginning of the segment and then we keep
walking forwards and whenever we find a value
which is smaller than the minimum position,
we update it and at the end of this loop we
exchange the position that we have found the
value at that position with the starting position.
So, now, the correct value, so some value
from say here has moved to the correct position
and now we recursively sort A starting at
position start plus 1 up to n. So, is this
any different in complexity?
So, let us write, so remember when we did
recursive calculations we said, that typically,
you would write a recurrence, right. You will
express the complexity of the algorithms itself
in a recursive way. So, suppose t n is the
number of steps you need to run selection
sort in length n, ok. So, the first thing
is, it requires n steps in order to find the
minimum and move it to the beginning and then
having moved it to the beginning the rest
of the array that is left to sort is of the
size of n minus 1. So, you need time recursively
t n minus 1, right. So, therefore, you have
t n. So, this is the time to find the minimum.
t n is, t n is n plus t n minus 1 which is
the recursive step.
And we said, that if we are sorting an array
of size 1, we do not have to do anything,
we just return. So, t of 1 is 1. So, t of
n is n plus t n minus 1. But now, if I take
t n minus 1 and expand it using the same expression,
I get n minus 1 plus t n minus 2. Now, if
I expand t n minus 2, I will get n minus 2
plus t n minus 3 and so on. And so this will
expand out to exactly what we got for the
recursive, for iterative algorithm, namely
n plus n minus 1 plus n minus 2 down to n,
right. So, what we have seen in this unit
is that we have seen, that a very natural
algorithm, which we would apply if we did
things by hand called selection sort can be
formalized both iteratively and recursively
and it gives us a complexity, which is order
n square.